In July 1939, a young Renata Collins from Czechoslovakia arrives at the home of her
new foster parents in Porth, South Wales.
And when I came to Porth, my foster mum, she took my plaits out, washed my hair and found I had ringlets.
Of course ringlets I had to have after that.
And when she held me on a lap, I wondered what she was doing.
Mum was quite loving because she looked after everybody in the church.
You know, if they were ill, she'd go and see them.
And so I had a first Welsh kutch.
First September 1939, Germany invades Poland.
At the same time, a group of German Jewish children travel from London to Abergalla in North Wales
to begin training for their new lives as agricultural workers.
Hermann Rothman is among them.
On the day war broke out, I was actually on my way to Guchhase.
Children of my age did not understand the full impact of war.
It's an experience which you learn then very much the hardware.
For most of us, we thought in any case it's not going to last very long, two or three months,
and then there will be peace and everything will be back to normal.
The start of the Second World War changed the landscape of Europe for Jewish refugees.
Escape to Britain became much more difficult, and as the war progressed,
those who had managed to find sanctuary came under suspicion as enemy aliens.
Added to this, a slow drip of information coming from friends and relatives on the continent
hinted at the horrors to come.
I'm Maurice Brodie, historian at Aberystwyth University.
In this third episode of the Holocaust in Wales, we look at how refugees adapted to their new lives in Wales.
How did the local community welcome them?
What challenges and opportunities did they face?
And how did their status change as the war progressed?
Adjusting to life in a different country after fleeing their homes and support networks
was a traumatic experience for many refugees.
The change required was quick, often too quick.
Des Goulton from Slovakia remembers his mother's difficulties after arriving in Cardiff.
Well, you see, I remember when we came, and my mother was very, very upset.
And she was crying all the time because she felt that she is not a different country.
She doesn't speak the language. She doesn't know anybody.
And she felt very left on her own.
Many continental refugees were from well-to-do, middle or upper class backgrounds
and unused to the more rural life found in Wales.
Gabby Cople's parents were from Germany and Hungary.
Between my parents, I think one got a sense of Cardiff being a little bit of a backwater.
You know, obviously they'd lived in major European capital cities.
In my dad's case, Berlin and Prague. In my mother's case, Budapest and Paris.
My mother definitely felt, you know, it was a little bit Hicksville.
And she had lots of stories about that kind of thing.
Where she said she went into a wine shop and asked for a rosé.
And they like didn't, it was a wine specialist. They'd never heard of it.
They didn't know what a rosé was.
And that seemed to encapsulate, you know, what Wales was like.
Leah Lesser came on the Kindertransport and stayed with a guardian in Bull Bay on Unus Mon, Anglesey.
There's a white bungalow on top of a hill.
And you approached it along a lane with two gates and then you went up two fields.
And when I lived there, originally in 39, we had no running water, no gas, no electricity.
We cooked on pyrophene and we carried water from the well.
And if it rained, we were lucky enough to have water in the tanks.
Despite these obstacles, many refugees found a warm welcome in Wales.
Fanny Höchstetter and Anton Hünsdorfer were both refugees from Germany,
but met after moving to Llangollen, where they married and started a family.
Here's Ernie Hunter, their son.
They always felt the Welsh people were warm and welcoming.
So for example, when my brother was born,
neither my father nor my mother earned particularly much or hadn't particularly much.
They didn't own a property. They were rented accommodation.
The Welsh ladies went around lending my mother all sorts of things for the newborn child.
So she was lent a pram.
Apparently, one of these big nanny type prams you see on television, et cetera, which my parents could never ever afford.
It wasn't given to her in the sense of keep it forever, but I'm not going to use it.
You have it.
Some refugees managed to forge a connection to Wales before relocating.
Kate Bossie Griffiths came to Britain as a refugee from Wittenberg in Germany in 1937.
An Egyptologist, she eventually got a job at the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford,
where she met her future husband, the Welshman Gwyn Griffiths.
They moved to the Rhondda in 1939.
Hynie Griffiths, Kate's son, thinks this helped her to assimilate into Welsh society.
And having met my father, married swiftly because of the war,
and came to the Rhondda when she was part of a very close-knit family.
So in a way she had a safety net in a Welsh family and Welsh culture,
which I imagine other refugees wouldn't normally have.
To many locals, refugees from Europe were a real curiosity.
Herman Rothman, who lived in a Jewish children's colony at Gwrach Castle,
remembers being quizzed by a group of Welsh farm workers after arriving from Germany.
To avoid any unnecessary tension, he told them he was Polish, where his father was from.
They heard I could speak English, and what a wonderful moment that was.
We were in a big shed. He called everybody in.
They sat in a circle, and I, they said, look on, sit in the middle of it.
And they fired questions at me with their Welsh accent.
First of all, I thought, that is very, very strange.
I was taught English, they pronounce it all completely different.
They must have taught me the wrong English.
So they said, have they got a cow in Poland?
So I answered, yes.
Have they got horses in Poland?
I answered in the affirmative.
I thought the questions were very elementary.
I thought, well, I didn't think that life, I thought perhaps life in Wales was elementary.
I felt very flattered by being the centre of an attraction in this cow shed or whatever it was.
Renata Collins left such an impression on locals in Porf that she started a new baby name trend.
And of course, I was a seven day wonder, wasn't I?
This child that had come from a country they'd never heard of.
And eventually I had three Renatas there, the church members, their grandchildren.
What a lovely name. And I'd love to know where they are now.
Child refugees needed to adapt not only to a new school, but a new language,
or two if they found themselves in a Welsh speaking area.
For Renata, being plunged into a new culture may have led her to forget her own.
Well, the first year I went to the senior school, you had to do Welsh.
And of course, mum Coppastone was from Fishguard, she was Welsh, spoken anyway.
She preached in Welsh.
Then the first year after Welsh, they put me in the German class.
Do you know I was bottom? I literally was bottom.
And you know, I'm certain that was psychological.
I wanted to obliterate my past, not intentionally.
Once the war started, some children were targeted for their German or Austrian heritage.
George Sherman came to Wales after his father moved his business from Vienna
to Trafora's trading estate near Pontypridd.
George attended school in Cardiff.
And I was teased.
You know, they would call me names.
Gerry was the favourite one.
They would run around pretending to be aeroplanes, as little children did in those days,
with arms outstretched, making noises.
And I was always the Messerschmitt, which got shot at.
Anyway, it was, it wasn't very pleasant.
The fact that I couldn't speak a word of English, of course,
and no effort was really made to include me in the lessons.
So every day at break time at 10 o'clock, I sneaked out through the gate and ran home.
During the war, the Czechoslovak government in exile set up a school for Czechoslovak children in Britain,
initially located in Shropshire.
In 1943, the school was relocated to the village of Llanurthed Wells in Poes.
Around 140 students were taught at the school, including Jewish refugee Milena Grenfell-Bames,
who grew up in Prosec, about 150 kilometres to the east of Prague.
It was very interesting because when we came here, this, it wasn't a town at the time,
and they had hardly seen any English, never mind a whole troop of Czech children.
And so we decided to give them a concert and sang for them.
Everything sang in Czech, but at the end we sang My Home Learned When Hard I.
And I think from that day, the town adopted us.
Leah Lesser also attended the Czechoslovak State School, having initially been schooled at Amluch.
The class I remember best of all is the third class,
and it used to be a hut. It used to have a big stove in the middle.
And for our leavenses, we used to have sliced bread and put it against the side of the stove and the top.
And we used to have lovely burnt toast, and we used to look forward to that every morning.
But we had a lovely time because everybody was lovely.
One of the hubs for adult refugees in South Wales was Triforce Trading Estate,
which hosted a number of factories started by refugee industrialists.
Des Goulton remembers how refugees transformed the area in the late 1930s.
In 1939 and beginning 1940, there was hardly any English spoken on the Triforce Estate.
The language spoken was either Czech or German or Hungarian.
And at the top of the war, there must have been easily 15,000 people working on the estate.
George Schoenman's family ran a box and cigarette paper company from Triforce.
They made boxes, well, I don't know, you could put shoes in them, all that sort of thing.
Although, of course, they didn't do so well in the war because on the one hand,
there was very little new stuff being produced.
And the one thing that you didn't need was luxury boxes.
So they did struggle a bit. And the main revenue stream was from the cigarette paper.
The estate was packed with refugee firms.
General Paper and Box.
Metal Products Brackets, Triforce Brackets Limited.
Planet Gloves.
Aerozip Fasters.
Opie Chocolate.
Burlington Gloves and Burlington Fabrics.
Wine Brothers.
Stuart Singham.
Triforce was an important employer in South Wales and one that fellow refugees could benefit from.
Refugees elsewhere often faced unfamiliar employment prospects.
Fanny Huchstetter was originally a civil servant in Stuttgart,
but in Wales she worked as a chambermaid at the Hand Hotel in Llangollen.
Her son, Ernie Hunter, describes how she dealt with it.
She buckled down to it, it's as simple as that, and from what I gather did whatever was needed,
even though she was most certainly not used to it.
So how efficient she was, I do not know,
because she was certainly not used to that sort of work, doing it at all.
Some refugees fully immersed themselves in Welsh cultural life.
Kate Bossagryffeths learnt the language and even published novels, short stories and non-fiction books in Welsh.
She never lost her German accent though, as Hiany Gryffith, her son, remembers.
Oh yes, I mean, Welsh to outsiders would be difficult to understand because of the accent until they tuned into it.
The o would always be pronounced as oof.
So wedi is a word that comes up often, I've gone rewediment, or vediment, that kind of thing.
Forget that, she didn't lose her German accent.
Events on the continent, however, were never far away.
From the beginning of the war, all adult Germans and Austrians living in Britain were classified as so-called enemy aliens.
Some were jailed, but initially most were permitted to live freely, albeit with certain restrictions.
George Sherman explains how refugees at Driforest coped with the government-mandated curfew.
And you had to be in your house by seven o'clock and you were not allowed out after seven.
So a lot of my friends were Czech, and of course they weren't subject to the curfew,
because the Czechs were allies and the Austrians weren't.
So mostly the visitors came to my parents because they were free to walk around in the evening and my parents weren't.
So this went on, there was a different night.
It worked like a railway timetable. If it was Tuesday, you knew the millers were coming.
If it was Wednesday, it was the tophlers. If it was Thursday, it was the court's funds.
If it was Friday, it was another family. And this went on week after week.
In May 1940, the German occupation of the Low Countries and France panicked the British government
and prompted the mass internment of German and Austrian citizens.
By June, 28,000 aliens, most of whom were Jewish refugees, were arrested and sent to various camps across the country,
the largest of which was on the Isle of Man.
Gabby Copple's father, Henry Copple, was one of the youngest to be interned and was subsequently deported to Canada.
He tried to make the best of it.
He was sent to Highton in Liverpool, which was a holding camp.
Then he was sent to the Isle of Man. And he did tell all these stories about how the Isle of Man, it was like a university to him.
He learned such a lot about music, the Amadeus Quartet. He heard them play.
He learned to play bridge, which was his lifelong passion.
My dad did always tend to look at the bright side, I'd say. And he was a pragmatist.
I think it was a bit of an adventure for him. He saw the world. He went to Canada.
The food, the rationals were absolutely rubbish in Canada.
But you had all these Vietnamese pastry chefs and they'd take all the rations and all this awful meat, quality meat that was being sent.
Make it into salami and sell it back to the Canadians at a profit.
Internies were eventually released, but the war affected refugees in other ways too.
Des Golden was in Cardiff when it was bombed by the German Luftwaffe.
I remember Cardiff being raided by the German air force.
And I remember we were living in Heathwood Road on top so we can overlook Cardiff.
And I remember an aeroplane. I didn't see the plane because it was at night.
But I remember the explosion and the aeroplane being shot down.
Refugees received war news either by letters from family members or through the Red Cross.
Herman Rothman remembers receiving news that, back in Germany, his father had been arrested and sent to Sachsenhausen concentration camp.
I took this letter into the lavatory, the bathroom, and for the first time I burst out crying.
Because I always kept myself as manly as possible without showing my emotions.
I went to the toilet. I remember this very, very well.
Because I knew that is the end for my father.
From time to time my mother said he's all right. She heard in concentration camp she's all right.
In May of 1940 I received a letter which was the best letter ever.
She said he has been released from concentration camp in Sachsenhausen and he is immediately going to Palestine illegally.
Well, as you would say, I celebrated Christmas. But I didn't in a Jewish way on a May day.
Few letters from Europe had such happy endings.
The last communication Renata Collins received from her parents was in June 1942 for her birthday.
That's the last communication I had from my mother.
That was the 10th of the 6th, 1942 via the Red Cross.
But it didn't say where she was. It said where it was going to, which is 8 Venus Street in Porth.
Many happy birthday wishes we think continually of you.
Our well hope you too. Much love, kind regards and thanks to your foster parents.
Now they were supposed to be able to be replied but when Coppastone tried to they said no there's no reply.
So that's the last communication.
Both Renata's parents and 62 other members of her family were murdered in the Holocaust.
By the end of 1944 it was clear that Germany and its allies would lose the war.
What was less clear, at least to many, was the scale of industrialised murder
perpetrated against the Jews of Europe by the Nazis and their collaborators.
In the next episode we hear the stories of those refugees who took up arms against their former homeland.
As well as those Welsh people who bore witness to the horrors of the Nazi camps at the moment of liberation.
Until next time, thanks for listening.